science is not you just go out into the
world and observe
stuff it's a heck of a lot more
complicated than that
so too for everything else even the
cameraman from groundhog day understood
this
well people just don't understand what
is involved in this this is an art form
you know i think that most people just
think that i hold the camera
and point it at stuff but there is a
heck of a lot more to it than just that
so even he knew even he knew
observations
are theory-laden and with more
sophisticated equipment
the more theory laden again your
observations become
this observations are theory-laden quip
is something that popper wrote and
popularized
i'm not sure how many people understand
it even if they have actually heard it
before
observations are theory related means
something kind of like
you have to know what you're looking at
and maybe i should break that down still
further
you have to know to know
what you're looking at you need
knowledge to know
what you're looking at you need to have
some knowledge
before you know what you're looking at
now if you lack knowledge
and you look at something and it makes
no sense you will have a problem
to know further you need to construct
more knowledge
in the last episode i talked about
falsification and that is what popular
is known for but actually i think it's
more popular to say
observations are theory laden then
scientific theories must be testable
i think observations are theory laden
gets more deeply to the heart of the
matter
the idea scientific theories must be
testable is actually a special case
of what observations you need to know to
make to refute a theory
it's in a sense a special case what has
this to do with anything
well i think you can guess given the
title of the video
this is the question i asked david
towards the very end of our discussion
more as a fun jokey kind of postscript
than anything else
because if you have a limited amount of
time with someone whose
opinion you really value on topics you
might not know everything about
you generally don't waste your time
asking the more frivolous things but
this
was an indulgence this was a slightly
more frivolous thing that i asked him
right at the end of our conversation i
was planning on leaving it
for some weeks before i put this episode
out but because it's in the media again
today i thought well it's timely so let
me release it now
it's a little reminiscent of asking
david deutsch what his favorite pop
stars are i'm sure he'd have some sort
of an answer
but i don't know how much value it's
going to give to the rest of us
nevertheless
let's persevere to tic tacs i think neil
tyson
who just appeared on sam harris talking
precisely about this
and has been on joe rogan talking about
this and well
he has talked about this a lot and makes
what i would say
philosophically epistemologically and
scientifically sound remarks
on this topic and basically those
remarks are to not say much at all
except
i don't know he says i don't know and
that's quite right and he talks about
how
unreliable observations are and data
taking is more generally
now in many moods neil tyson is an
empiricist
i've never heard neil say much about
philosophy that makes me think he has
read much at all in the field
i understand these kind of people
especially these kind of scientists
sometimes they denigrate the entire
field because
well if you go to my chapter 12
breakdown of a physicist history of bad
philosophy from
the beginning of infinity i explain why
this phenomena is completely
understandable namely the phenomena of
scientists having an aversion to
academic philosophy
because academic philosophy in the main
is completely silly and pointless and
it's navel gazing and so on
so that's all fine the problem is it
also contains
the error that therefore all philosophy
must be like this and of course it isn't
as we've been at pains in this podcast
to point out
but whatever the case neil degrasse
tyson when he's on the topic of
pseudoscience
like what those grainy images of stuff
we can't explain
might be when he's concentrating on that
he's an absolutely brilliant critical
thinker a natural porpurian of a kind
of course ask him to explain how science
works in detail and he'll get it all
wrong
because he'll then go into academic mode
and start talking about accumulating
more and more evidence to become more
and more confident about how data taken
from instruments
is more reliable even though we humans
are unreliable
so he'll start to make certain errors
that claim by the way that
scientific instrumentation is
necessarily more reliable than
humans as if that some sort of law of
nature is false because of something
called the duhem quine thesis you never
know
if it's your instrument that's going
wrong because maybe you don't know about
the instrument and how it works
a human can be correct and an instrument
can be incorrect because the instrument
needs calibration and it needs to have a
good
theoretical underpinning of how it works
behind it and neil kind of
actually appreciates that perfectly well
when he's explaining
stuff like grainy images of apparently
things defying laws of physics as people
have been saying about these things
instruments can malfunction basically it
takes a lot of knowledge to know
what the instrument is saying there are
many many many cases where a human has
been correct
einstein and the community of physicists
say while at the same time there have
been systematic errors
for an example of this consider the
faster than light neutrinos that were
apparently measured at the large hadron
collider
that was a case of instrumentation error
and people making an error about how the
instrument works
one of my more favorite ones here in
australia was the apparent
variation of something called the value
of the fine structure constant it was
very exciting some years ago people
thought this
constant of nature was changing over
time turns out
systematic experimental error again so
even scientists working right at the
envelope of what is known with the most
precise instruments in the world
can make terrible blunders so much the
worse for everyone
else trying to understand sophisticated
instrument
readings and that includes things like
the output of certain cameras and radars
and military equipment
so anyway unlike neil degrasse tyson who
would say something like
instruments get the data right and don't
care if they haven't had their morning
coffee
it sort of misses the point the point is
the bit about how those observations are
theory laden all the time
all that aside again when he's on the
question
of these images of apparently alien
spacecraft let's just put it out there
people claiming that this is evidence of
intelligent creatures visiting us from
the other side of the galaxy
we don't need to consult every physicist
on the planet and take a straw poll
about whether this is evidence of life
from another galaxy
the short answer is we don't know no one
seems to know
unless there's a cover-up but none of us
outside the cover-up know that either
and as a working hypothesis
it's a cover-up explains nothing
cover-up of what
cover-up of government technology aliens
travelers from the future cover-up of
just prosaic human error
the us government might want to cover up
how hapless
their navy are easily confused by enemy
military technology perhaps
and all of that is just general purpose
too any set of anomalous observations
made by anyone can be claimed to be a
cover-up of some kind by a powerful
entity the shadow government or whatever
and so too of course can the italian
spacecraft
be a general purpose non-explanation
so with all of that in mind i was a
little reluctant to
ask david about this because i kind of
knew the answer to some extent
i left it to the end as a bit of a joke
but in his style he gave a
deeply popular answer and here he talks
about just how hard it is
to make observations specifically to see
what is right in front
of your eyes the evidence is here right
now for
you and for me in the room wherever we
happen to be
if only you know how to look for it you
could win a nobel prize in some field of
science the evidence is
here right now if you know how to
collect it and how to interpret it
in his answer that he's about to give
david mentions the stern gulak
experiment
this is an experiment that requires
highly precise
measurements of particles it's very
difficult to do
relies on complex equipment and what
goes on happens
right in front of their eyes the eyes of
the experimenter or anyone who repeats
the experiment
yet interpreting trying to figure out
exactly what it all means
that's the hard part transpose that
whole
scenario onto something purportedly even
more complex
images on a radar or an infrared camera
or a regular camera or the human eyes
and then add to that those instruments
are making observations of something
we've got no clue about
but which some people claim are alien
spacecraft from another galaxy or
something or other
how much more difficult then is it to
interpret what's really going on
in those observations in order to rule
out all other theories
in favor of it must be aliens from
another galaxy theory
how is that the best theory when
eddington in 1919
helped perform the experiment that ruled
out newtonian gravity
in favor of einstein's relativity he was
in the
lucky position of having two viable
theories
the experiment was precise but only an
expert physicist
would be able to properly interpret the
results and then conclude
all the other theories have been refuted
the only one left standing
is einstein's general relativity and
that's the experts
with actual explanations on offer here
with these so-called
tic tacs what we have are non-experts
with
no theories or at least no explanatory
theories
they have some wild guesses making
observations
and the observations happen sometimes
long ago
in another place and apparently cannot
be repeated so we're doing
history as much as we're doing science
and philosophy
making observations is very very
difficult and that is david's point here
when i ask him
okay this question is just purely for
fun um do you have any opinion on
tic tacs that's a big thing going on at
the moment and do you know what i'm
talking
about no i don't know what it is oh okay
so this is the um the american military
specifically i think the navy who've
released these videos
of what they say are
unidentified objects of some kind
and i know this is ridiculous they say
things like
they're violating laws of physics or at
least
they are evidence of technology which is
not
explicable given the current state of
technology
you haven't heard about these things
seen anything about these things nor
have any opinion on these things well
now that you mention it i i've seen
things on twitter
which are now explicable in the light of
uh
is it the the american military or
something having
having said something about ufos is that
yes
i see okay well um the opportunities for
error
are enormous and
to perform a scientific experiment
that is is a crucial test of
sophisticated scientific theories is
very very difficult and
universally almost universally
underestimated
it's sort of taken for granted that that
einstein did a very difficult thing
but it's not so much understood that
stern and gerlach who who
did experiments on quantum
superpositions of particles in different
positions
but they did an amazing thing as well
yes
good experiments are rare
and they require usually a
great deal of skill and creativity and
it's not the kind of thing
that military pilots
or policemen are typically
cognizant of yes so
i think when people like that report a
thing that quote
violates the laws of physics i i would
consider it unreasonable to go for
any explanation of that other than human
error
yes yes and of course when you do look
at the the footage there is no
apparent violation laws of physics even
if you grant that this thing is
moving at a high velocity beyond
anything that we might be capable of
that's still
sub light speed so it hasn't violated
relativity on the one hand and
by the way even if you don't have an
answer for what's going on there well
that's kind of
where you might have to stop you don't
immediately leap to its uh
aliens from the other side of the galaxy
so like i say
originally i planned on leaving this
question for david
for many weeks once all the more serious
stuff had been talked about all the
stuff that i actually find more fun to
be honest
but strike while the iron is hot so they
say i think that this
answer from david is an excellent
supplement to what neil tyson has said
on the topic in various places and it's
easy to find
especially in that last sam harris
podcast with neil degrasse tyson
i don't personally think and i agree
with neil here that physicists and
others need to speak out often about
this kind of thing
it's rather like a james randy is needed
but not every magician or skeptic needs
to concentrate on doing precisely that
job
there's more important things to do
there's more important problems to solve
and outreach to make and so on
but there we have it david deutsch
explaining that observations are
difficult to make
very very difficult seeing is not
believing expert knowledge can be
required to interpret even simple
observations in experimental physics
so much more is that true when we have
military equipment
few people understand making
observations apparently if it's not all
doctored or the equivalent of systematic
instrument error
being interpreted by people who are
pilots and not experts
on how sophisticated observations are
typically made
outside of their narrow field of
expertise which is
flying jets and shooting at stuff that's
hard enough in itself they can't be
expected to
know precisely how the radar works and
what might go on with the radar and the
cameras and everything else
it's not to denigrate anyone to say that
they've made a mistake
error is the normal state of things
people make mistakes we have
no clue what these things are but to
leap to
that therefore it's aliens visiting from
another galaxy
is just plain wrong it's a non-sequitur
apparently the it's aliens from the
other side of the galaxy
is indeed one theory we cannot rule out
but there are an infinite number of
theories we
cannot rule out with these observations
including
that they're not really observations at
all they're just errors
human systematic instrumental so on
if you want to hear me talking more
about aliens
and alien life you can see this episode
here which is up
and i've written a whole bunch of stuff
on my website as well if you just search
brett hall alien intelligence you will
find me
writing about alien intelligence this
issue of alien intelligence and in fact
uh criticizing some of neil degrasse
tyson's reasoning i
tend to disagree with his vision of what
humans are
for example fundamentally have a deep
disagreement that we are
as neil degrasse tyson likes to say just
on the intelligence continuum with
everything from bacteria through to
insects through to dogs and chimpanzees
and we're just the next step
on the intelligence continuum i think
that is completely misconceived
it's not a continuum there is a
qualitative difference between what our
minds can do and what
other animals minds can do and in fact
our minds have this
universal capacity for
understanding the rest of physical
reality but i've talked about that
more than enough elsewhere and at other
times and that too
can be found out there on the internet
okay until next time bye
you